kanhaiya kumar is a leader of the all india student federation (aisf), the student wing of the communist party of india (cpi). he was elected president of the jawaharlal nehru university students' union in 2015. in february 2016, he was arrested and charged with sedition on the charges of raising anti-india slogans in a student rally against the 2013 hanging of mohammed afzal guru, a kashmiri separatist convicted over the 2001 indian parliament attack. he was released on interim bail at 2 march 2016, since no evidence of kumar participating in anti-national slogans has been presented by the police.in parallel, a disciplinary committee constituted by jnu vice-chancellor is also investigating the controversial event. on the basis of the initial investigation report, kanhaiya kumar and seven other students were academically debarred.


== early life and political career ==
kanhaiya kumar was born and brought up in the village of bihar in begusarai district, in bihar, india. this village is part of the teghra legislative assembly constituency, known to be a stronghold of the communist party of india (cpi). kumar’s father, jaishankar singh, suffers from paralysis and has been bedridden for a few years. his mother, meena devi, is an anganwadi worker. he has an elder brother who works in the private sector. his family members have traditionally been supporters of the cpi.
kanhaiya kumar studied in rkc high school in barauni, an industrial town in bihar. during his school days, kumar took part in several plays and activities organized by ipta (indian people’s theatre association), a left-leaning cultural group going back to the days of india’s freedom struggle. he completed his schooling from rkc high school, barauni in 2002 and moved to patna to join the college of commerce, where he began his involvement in student politics. he graduated in geography from magadh university in 2007. he joined the aisf and a year later was selected as a delegate at its conference in patna. after completing his post graduation, kanhaiya kumar moved to delhi and joined jnu where he is currently pursuing a phd in african studies at the school of international studies. in 2015 september, kanhaiya kumar became the first aisf member to become president of the jnu students’ union, defeating the aisa (all india students association), abvp (akhil bharatiya vidyarthi parishad), sfi (students' federation of india) and nsui (national students' union of india) candidates. kumar's friends and spectators describe him as a great orator. a speech he made the night before his election is credited as the reason for his victory.


== 2016 sedition controversy ==

on 12 february 2016, kanhaiya kumar was arrested by the delhi police. a case was registered against him on feb 13, under indian penal code sections 124-a (sedition) and 120-b (criminal conspiracy). he was charged over an event organised by some students at the jawaharlal nehru university campus against the hanging of parliament attack convict afzal guru, following complaints by bharatiya janata party member of parliament maheish girri and the abvp. kanhaiya kumar denied the charges and said that he was neither shouting any slogan nor saying anything against integrity of the country. he said in an interview that "i dissociate myself from the slogans which were shouted in the event. i have full faith in the constitution of the country and i always say that kashmir is an integral part of india”. during his interrogation kanhaiya insisted that he did not say anything that was seditious.
kanhaiya kumar's arrest soon snowballed into a major political controversy and has drawn sharp reactions from opposition parties, teachers, students and academics. students at jawaharlal nehru university went on strike over kanhaiya kumar’s arrest, effectively paralysing the university.
kanhaiya kumar's parents stated that their son was being victimized for his opposition to hindutva politics. when kumar was brought to the patiala house court on february 15, 2016, jnu students and professors, as well as journalists, were attacked by a group of lawyers. bjp mla o.p. sharma was also involved in the assault, although he later denied the charge. on 17 february, kumar was once again assaulted by some lawyers inside the patiala house court. on february 22, 2016, india today broadcast a video in which three lawyers of the patiala house court claimed that they had beaten kanhaiya kumar while the latter was in police custody. a six member supreme court-appointed panel later confirmed that the policemen present at the court were responsible for the security lapses, and further stating that police allowed 2 persons to enter the court room, and continued to let the assault take place, in direct violation of the sc direction on kanhaiya's safety.
on 2 march 2016, kumar was granted bail by the delhi high court, conditional on a 10,000 rupee bail bond and an undertaking that he would not "participate in any anti-national activity." justice pratibha rani noted that there were no recordings of kumar participating in anti-national slogans. going beyond the immediate issue, the judge also held that the alleged slogans threaten national integrity and cannot be considered as free speech. she characterized them as a form of "infection," which can either be treated or, in some cases, "amputationi is the only treatment." a separate magisterial investigation appointed by the delhi government did not find any evidence of kanhaiya kumar participating in anti-national slogans. out of the 7 videos of the event sent to forensic lab, three were found to be doctored including a clipping of a news channel.
on 3 march 2016, kanhaiya kumar gave a speech to a packed auditorium in the jnu campus, during which he said he was seeking, not freedom from india, but freedom within india. he appealed to his fellow students to free the nation from the clutches of the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh, which he said was trying to divide the nation. referring to the abvp(right wing student organization), whose members were instrumental in bringing about his arrest, he called them his "opposition", not his enemy. he urged his supporters to keep raising the slogans of azadi (freedom). the speech won accolades from the leaders of all non-bjp parties as well as independent commentators. shashi tharoor commented that it turned kumar into a "nationwide political star," and congratulated bjp for creating his phenomenon.
following his release from jail, kumar has faced bounties and death threats. reacting to this, central government have taken immediate actions against the culprits and announced that adequate security will be given to kanhaiya kumar. kuldeep varshnay, a leader of the youth wing of bjp was expelled from the organisation for offering rs 5 lakh as a reward to anyone who cut off kumar’s tongue.  posters were put up in new delhi offering rs 11 lakh as a reward to anyone who shoots kumar. adarsh sharma who allegedly put up these posters has been arrested on 7 march 2016.


== other controversies ==


=== statements against indian army ===
on 8 march 2016, speaking at an international women's day function, kumar referred to the raping of kashmir women by security personnal, which has been criticised as being "anti-national" by critics. "no matter how much you try to stop us, we will speak up against human rights violations. we will raise our voice against afspa. while we have a lot of respect for our soldiers, we will still talk about the fact that in kashmir women are raped by security personnel," kumar is reported to have said. the bharatiya janata yuva morcha (the bjp's youth wing) filed a complaint in a delhi police station against kumar and jnu professor nivedita menon, alleging that they made "anti-national" statements. mayank tiwari, a bjp worker in bihar, filed sedition and defamation case against him in a civil court in patna.


=== abusing and threatening a female student ===
on 10 march 2016, kamlesh narwana, ex jnu student unveiled an unsigned university order dated october 16, 2015. according to the document, kanhaiya kumar was fined rs. 3000 for misbehaving and threatening a woman student. news agency press trust of india claimed that the authenticity of the letter is confirmed by the (jnu) university. according to the order, kumar was fined rs 3,000 and warned to avoid such incidents in future. narwana, who is currently an assistant professor at the delhi university, wrote an open letter to kumar and posted it on facebook. she alleged that kumar was urinating in the open and, when she objected, he became abusive and threatened her.


=== teenager challenging kanhaiya kumar ===
15 year old jhanvi behal, who had earlier challenged kanhaiya kumar for an open debate on ‘the freedom of expression’, has now alleged that she is receiving abusive threats over social networking websites from jnu students and kanhaiya’s supporters. the police complaint filed with punjab director general of police (dgp) in this regards is being investigated by ludhiana police. in other letter to punjab dgp, ngo raksha jyoti foundation has demanded security cover for the teenager.


== see also ==
umar khalid


== references ==


== further reading ==
southik biswas, kanhaiya kumar: india's most loved and loathed student, bbc news, 11 march 2016.


== external links ==
text of kanhaiya kumar's speech at jnu, hindustan times, 17 february 2016.