adele laurie blue adkins mbe (/əˈdɛl/; born 5 may 1988) is an english singer and songwriter. graduating from the brit school for performing arts and technology in 2006, adele was given a recording contract by xl recordings after a friend posted her demo on myspace the same year. in 2007, she received the brit awards "critics' choice" award and won the bbc sound of 2008 poll. her debut album, 19, was released in 2008 to commercial and critical success. it is certified seven times platinum in the uk, and double platinum in the us. an appearance she made on saturday night live in late 2008 boosted her career in the us. at the 51st annual grammy awards in 2009, adele received the awards for best new artist and best female pop vocal performance.
adele released her second studio album, 21, in early 2011. the album was well received critically and surpassed the success of her debut, earning the singer numerous awards in 2012, including a record-tying six grammy awards, including album of the year; two brit awards, including british album of the year, and three american music awards. the album has been certified 16 times platinum in the uk, and is the fourth best-selling album in the uk of all time. in the us it has held the top position longer than any album since 1985, and is certified diamond. the album has sold 31 million copies worldwide.
the success of 21 earned adele numerous mentions in the guinness book of world records. she is the first woman in the history of the billboard hot 100 to have three simultaneous top 10 singles as a lead artist, and the first female artist to simultaneously have two albums in the top five of the billboard 200 and two singles in the top five of the billboard hot 100. 21 is the longest-running number one album by a female solo artist in the history of the uk and us album charts. in 2012, she released "skyfall", which she wrote and recorded for the james bond film of the same name. the song won an academy award, a grammy award, and a golden globe award for best original song. after taking a three-year break, adele released her third studio album, 25, on 20 november 2015. the album debuted at number one in most major markets and broke first week sales records in the uk and us. the lead single, "hello", debuted at number one in many countries around the world, and became the first song in the us to sell over one million digital copies within a week of its release.
in 2011 and 2012, billboard named adele artist of the year. in 2012, she was listed at number five on vh1's 100 greatest women in music, and time magazine named her one of the most influential people in the world. with sales of more than 100 million records, adele is one of the best-selling recording artists in the world.


== early life ==
adele laurie blue adkins was born on 5 may 1988 in tottenham, london, the daughter of an english mother, penny adkins, and a welsh father, mark evans. evans left when adele was two, leaving her mother to raise her. she began singing at age four and asserts that she became obsessed with voices. growing up, adele spent most of her time singing rather than reading; the last book she read was roald dahl's matilda when she was six years old. in 1997, at the age of nine, adele and her mother, who by then had found work as a furniture maker and an adult-learning activities organiser, relocated to brighton on the south coast of england.
in 1999, two years later, she and her mother moved back to london; first to brixton, and then to neighbouring district west norwood, in south london. west norwood is the subject for adele's first record, "hometown glory", which she wrote and composed in 2004, when she was 16. adele graduated from the brit school for performing arts & technology in croydon in may 2006, where she was a classmate of leona lewis and jessie j. adele credits the school with nurturing her talent even though, at the time, she was more interested in going into a&r and hoped to launch other people's careers.


== career ==


=== 2006–10: beginnings and 19 ===

four months after graduation, she published two songs on the fourth issue of the online arts publication platformsmagazine.com. she had recorded a three-song demo for a class project and given it to a friend. the friend posted the demo on myspace, where it became very successful and led to a phone call from richard russell, boss of the music label xl recordings. she doubted if the offer was real because the only record company she knew was virgin records, and she took a friend with her to the meeting.
nick huggett, at xl, recommended adele to manager jonathan dickins at september management, and in june 2006, dickins became her official representative. september was managing jamie t at the time and this proved a major draw for adele, a big fan of the british singer-songwriter. huggett then signed adele to xl in september 2006. adele provided vocals for jack peñate's song, "my yvonne," for his debut album, and it was during this session she first met producer jim abbiss, who would go on to produce both the majority of her debut album, 19, and tracks on 21. in june 2007, adele made her television debut, performing "daydreamer" on the bbc's later... with jools holland. adele's breakthrough song, "hometown glory", was released in october 2007.
by 2008, adele had become the headliner and performed an acoustic set, in which she was supported by damien rice. she became the first recipient of the brit awards critics' choice and was named the number-one predicted breakthrough act of 2008 in an annual bbc poll of music critics, sound of 2008. the album 19, named for her age at the time she wrote and composed many of its songs, entered the british charts at number one. the times encyclopedia of modern music named 19 an "essential" blue-eyed soul recording. she released her second single, "chasing pavements", on 14 january 2008, two weeks ahead of her debut album, 19. the song reached number two on the uk chart, and stayed there for four weeks. adele was nominated for a 2008 mercury prize award for 19. she also won an urban music award for "best jazz act." she also received a q awards nomination in the category of breakthrough act and a music of black origin nomination in the category of best uk female. in march 2008, adele signed a deal with columbia records and xl recordings for her foray into the united states. she embarked on a short north american tour in the same month, and 19 was released in the us in june. billboard magazine stated of it: "adele truly has potential to become among the most respected and inspiring international artists of her generation." the an evening with adele world tour began in may 2008 and ended in june 2009.

she later cancelled the 2008 us tour dates to be with a former boyfriend. she said in nylon magazine in june 2009, "i'm like, 'i can't believe i did that.' it seems so ungrateful.... i was drinking far too much and that was kind of the basis of my relationship with this boy. i couldn't bear to be without him, so i was like, 'well, i'll just cancel my stuff then.'" she referred to this period as her "early life crisis". she is also known for her dislike of flying and bouts of homesickness when away from her native london. by the middle of october 2008, adele's attempt to break in america appeared to have failed. but then she was booked as the musical guest on 18 october 2008 episode of nbc's saturday night live. the episode, which included an expected appearance by then us vice-presidential candidate sarah palin, earned the program its best ratings in 14 years with 17 million viewers. adele performed "chasing pavements" and "cold shoulder," and the following day, 19 topped the itunes charts and ranked at number five at amazon.com while "chasing pavements" rose into the top 25. the album reached number 11 on the billboard 200 as a result, a jump of 35 places over the previous week. in november 2008 adele moved to notting hill, london after leaving her mother's house, a move that prompted her to give up drinking. the album was certified as gold in february 2009 by the riaa. by july 2009, the album had sold 2.2 million copies worldwide.
at the 51st annual grammy awards in february 2009, adele received the award for best new artist, in addition to the award for best female pop vocal performance for "chasing pavements", which was also nominated for record of the year and song of the year. adele performed "chasing pavements" at the ceremony in a duet with jennifer nettles. in 2010, adele received a grammy nomination for best female pop vocal performance for "hometown glory." in april her song "my same" entered the german singles chart after it had been performed by lena meyer-landrut in the talent show contest unser star für oslo, or our star for oslo, in which the german entry to the eurovision song contest 2010 was determined. in late september, after being featured on the x factor, adele's version of bob dylan's "make you feel my love" re-entered the uk singles chart at number 4. during the 2010 cmt artists of the year special, adele performed a widely publicised duet of lady antebellum's "need you now" with darius rucker. this performance was later nominated for a cmt music award.


=== 2011–14: 21, worldwide recognition and hiatus ===

adele released her second studio album, 21, on 24 january 2011 in the uk and 22 february in the us. she said that the album was inspired by the break-up with her former partner. the album's sound is described as classic and contemporary country and roots music. the change in sound from her first album was the result of her bus driver playing contemporary music from nashville when she was touring the american south, and the title reflected the growth she had experienced in the prior two years. adele told spin magazine: "it was really exciting for me because i never grew up around [that music]." 21 hit number 1 in more than 26 countries, including the uk and the us.
an emotional performance of "someone like you" at the 2011 brit awards on 15 february propelled the song to number one in the uk. her first album, 19, re-entered the uk album chart alongside 21, while first and second singles "rolling in the deep" and "someone like you" were in the top 5 of the uk singles chart, making adele the first living artist to achieve the feat of two top-five hits in both the official singles chart and the official albums chart simultaneously since the beatles in 1964. both songs topped the charts in multiple markets and broke numerous sales performance records. following her performance of "someone like you" at the 2011 mtv video music awards, it became adele's second number-one single on the billboard hot 100. by december 2011, 21 sold over 3.4 million copies in the uk, and became the biggest-selling album of the 21st century, overtaking amy winehouse's back to black, with adele becoming the first artist ever to sell three million albums in the uk in one calendar year. "set fire to the rain" became adele's third number one single on the billboard hot 100, as adele became the first artist ever to have an album, 21, hold the number-one position on the billboard 200 concurrently with three number one singles.
to promote the album, adele embarked upon the "adele live" tour, which sold out its north american leg. in october 2011, adele was forced to cancel two tours because of a vocal-cord haemorrhage. she released a statement saying she needed an extended period of rest to avoid permanent damage to her voice. in the first week of november 2011 steven m. zeitels, director of the center for laryngeal surgery and voice rehabilitation at the massachusetts general hospital in boston, performed laser microsurgery on adele's vocal cords to remove a benign polyp. a recording of her tour, live at the royal albert hall, was released in november 2011, debuting at number one in the us with 96,000 copies sold, the highest one-week tally for a music dvd in four years, becoming the best-selling music dvd of 2011. adele is the first artist in nielsen soundscan history to have the year's number-one album (21), number-one single ("rolling in the deep"), and number-one music video. at the 2011 american music awards on 20 november, adele won three awards; favorite pop/rock female artist, favorite adult contemporary artist, and favorite pop/rock album for 21. on 9 december, billboard named adele artist of the year, billboard 200 album of the year (21), and the billboard hot 100 song of the year ("rolling in the deep"), becoming the first woman ever to top all three categories.
following the throat microsurgery, she made her live comeback at the 2012 grammy awards in february. she won in all six categories for which she was nominated, making her the second female artist in grammy history, after beyoncé, to win that many categories in a single night. following that success, 21 achieved the biggest weekly sales increase following a grammy win since nielsen soundscan began tracking data in 1991. adele received the brit award for best british female solo artist, and british album of the year presented to her by george michael. following the brit awards, 21 reached number one for the 21st non-consecutive week in the uk. the album has sold over 4.5 million copies in the uk where it is the fourth best-selling album of all time. in october, the album passed the 4.5 million mark in the uk, and in november surpassed the 10 million mark in the us. as of 2014, the album has sold 30 million copies worldwide. she has sold an estimated 40 million albums and 50 million singles worldwide. adele is the only artist or band in the last decade in the us to earn an riaa diamond certification for a one disc album in less than two years.

in october 2012, adele confirmed that she had been writing, composing and recording the theme song for skyfall, the twenty-third james bond film. the song "skyfall," written and composed in collaboration with producer paul epworth, was recorded at abbey road studios, and features orchestrations by j. a. c. redford. adele stated recording "skyfall" was "one of the proudest moments of my life." on 14 october, "skyfall" rose to number 2 on the uk singles chart with sales of 92,000 copies bringing its overall sales to 176,000, and "skyfall" entered the billboard hot 100 at number 8, selling 261,000 copies in the us in its first three days. this tied "skyfall" with duran duran's "a view to a kill" as the highest-charting james bond theme song on the uk singles chart; a record surpassed in 2015 by sam smith's "writing's on the wall".
"skyfall" has sold more than two million copies worldwide and earned adele the golden globe award for best original song and the academy award for best original song. in december 2012, adele was named billboard artist of the year, and 21 was named album of the year, making her the first artist to receive both accolades two years in a row. adele was also named top female artist. the associated press named adele entertainer of the year for 2012. the 2013 grammy awards saw adele's live version of "set fire to the rain" win the grammy award for best pop solo performance, bringing her total wins to nine.
on 3 april 2012, adele confirmed that her third album would likely be at least two years away, stating, "i have to take time and live a little bit. there were a good two years between my first and second albums, so it'll be the same this time." she stated that she would continue writing and composing her own material. at the 2013 grammy awards, she confirmed that she was in the very early stages of her third album and was having meetings while staying in los angeles for the oscars. she also stated that she will most likely work with paul epworth again.
in september 2013, wiz khalifa confirmed that he and adele had collaborated on a song for his upcoming fifth studio album, blacc hollywood, though the collaboration did not make the final track listing. in january 2014, adele received her tenth grammy award with "skyfall" winning best song written for visual media at the 56th annual grammy awards. on the eve of her 26th birthday in may 2014, adele posted a cryptic message via her twitter account which prompted media discussion about her next album. the message, "bye bye 25... see you again later in the year," was interpreted by outlets including the daily mail and capital fm as meaning that her next album would be titled 25 and released later in the year. in 2014, adele was nominated for nine world music awards. in early august, paul moss suggested that an album would be released in 2014 or 2015. however, in the october 2014 accounts filed with companies house by xl recordings, they ruled out a 2014 release.


=== 2015–present: 25 ===
on 27 august 2015, billboard reported that adele's label, xl recordings, had intentions of releasing her third studio album sometime in november 2015. danger mouse has contributed a song, while tobias jesso jr. has written a track, and ryan tedder is "back in the mix after producing and co-writing "rumour has it" on 21." at the 72nd venice international film festival in early september 2015, sia announced that her new single "alive" was co-written by adele, and had originally been intended for adele's third album. on 18 october, a 30-second clip of new material from adele was shown on uk television during a commercial break on the x factor. the commercial teases a snippet from a new song from her third album, with viewers hearing a voice singing accompanied by lyrics on a black screen.
in a statement released three days later she confirmed that the album is titled 25, with adele stating, "my last record was a break-up record, and if i had to label this one, i would call it a make-up record. making up for lost time. making up for everything i ever did and never did. 25 is about getting to know who i've become without realising. and i'm sorry it took so long but, you know, life happened." adele also believes 25 will be her last album with her age as its title, believing that 25 would be the end to a trilogy. on 22 october, adele confirmed that 25 would be released on 20 november, while the lead single from the album, "hello" would be released on 23 october. the song was first played on nick grimshaw's radio 1 breakfast show on the bbc on the morning of 23 october with adele interviewed live. the video of "hello", released on 22 october, was viewed over 27.7 million times on youtube in its first 24 hours, breaking the vevo record for the most views in a day, surpassing the 20.1 million views for "bad blood" by taylor swift. on 28 october, news outlets, including bbc news, reported that "hello" was being viewed on youtube an average one million times an hour. "hello" went on to become the fastest video to hit one billion views on youtube, which it achieved after 88 days. the song debuted at number one in the uk singles chart on 30 october, with first week sales of 330,000 copies, making it the biggest-selling number one single in three years. "hello" also debuted at number one in many countries around the world, including australia, france, canada, new zealand, ireland and germany, and on 2 november, the song debuted at number one on the billboard hot 100, becoming the first song in the us to sell at least one million downloads in a week, setting the record at 1.11 million.
on 27 october, bbc one announced plans for adele at the bbc, a one-hour special presented by graham norton, in which adele talks about her new album and performs new songs. this was her first television appearance since performing at the 2013 academy awards ceremony, and the show was recorded before a live audience on 2 november for broadcast on 20 november, coinciding with the release of 25. on 27 october it was also announced that the singer would make an appearance on the us entertainment series saturday night live on 21 november. on 30 october, adele confirmed that she would be performing a one-night-only concert titled "adele live in new york city" at the radio city music hall on 17 november. subsequently, nbc aired the concert special on 14 december.
on 27 november, 25 debuted at number one on the uk albums chart and became the fastest selling album in uk chart history with over 800,000 copies sold in its first week. the album debuted at number one in the us where it sold a record-breaking 3.38 million copies in its first week, the largest single sales week for an album since nielsen began monitoring sales in 1991. 25 also broke first week sales records in canada and new zealand. 25 became the best-selling album of 2015 in a number of countries, including australia, the uk and the us, where it spent seven consecutive weeks at number one in each country, before being displaced by the late david bowie's final album, blackstar. adele's seven weeks at the top of the uk albums chart took her total to 31 weeks at number one in the uk with her three albums, surpassing madonna's previous record of most weeks at number one for a female act ever in the uk.
in november 2015, adele's 2016 tour was announced, her first tour since 2011. beginning in europe, adele live 2016 includes four dates at the manchester arena in march, eight dates at the o2 arena, london in march and april, with further dates in ireland, spain, germany, italy and the netherlands among others. her north american tour which begins in july, includes six dates at staples center, los angeles in august, six dates at madison square garden, new york in september, four dates at air canada centre, toronto in october, and two dates at palacio de los deportes, mexico city in november. while on stage at london's o2 arena on 17 march, adele announced that she would be headlining on the pyramid stage at the 2016 glastonbury festival; the festival's organizers later confirmed she would be appearing there.
at the 2016 brit awards in london on 24 february, adele received the awards for british female solo artist, british album of the year for 25, british single of the year for "hello", and british global success. she closed the ceremony by performing "when we were young", the second single from 25.


== artistry ==


=== influences and favourite musicians ===
adele has cited the spice girls as a major influence in regard to her love and passion for music, stating that "they made me what i am today". adele impersonated the spice girls at dinner parties as a young girl. she stated she was left "heartbroken" when her favourite spice girl, geri halliwell aka "ginger spice", left the group. she has also stated that growing up, she listened to sinéad o'connor, the cure, dusty springfield, celine dion, and annie lennox. she admired english r&b and urban contemporary singer gabrielle, and to make her look like the singer her mother made her an eye patch with sequins, which adele later said was embarrassing. after moving to south london, she became interested in r&b artists such as aaliyah, destiny's child, and mary j. blige. adele says that one of the most defining moments in her life was when she watched pink perform at brixton academy in london. she states: "it was the missundaztood record, so i was about 13 or 14. i had never heard, being in the room, someone sing like that live [...] i remember sort of feeling like i was in a wind tunnel, her voice just hitting me. it was incredible."
in 2002, aged 14, adele discovered etta james and ella fitzgerald as she stumbled on the artists' cds in the jazz section of her local music store. she was struck by their appearance on the album covers. adele states she then "started listening to etta james every night for an hour," and in the process was getting "to know my own voice." adele credits amy winehouse and her 2003 album frank for inspiring her to take up the guitar, stating, "if it wasn't for amy and frank, one 100 per cent i wouldn't have picked up a guitar, i wouldn't have written "daydreamer" or "hometown [glory]" and i wrote "someone like you" on the guitar too." she also states that her mother, who is very close to her, exposed her to the music of aaliyah, lauryn hill, mary j. blige, and alicia keys, all of whom inspired her as well. she is also a fan of lana del rey, fka twigs, alabama shakes, kanye west, rihanna, frank ocean, stevie nicks, and beyoncé. one of adele's earliest influences was british soul artist gabrielle, who adele has admired since the age of five, performing as the hackney born star with an eye-patch in a school talent contest. adele cited madonna's album ray of light as a "chief inspiration" behind her album 25.


=== musical style and vocals ===
adele's first album, 19, is of the soul genre, with lyrics describing heartbreak and relationship. her success occurred simultaneously with several other british female soul singers, with the british press dubbing her a new amy winehouse. this was described as a third british musical invasion of the us. however, adele called the comparisons between her and other female soul singers lazy, noting "we're a gender, not a genre". allmusic wrote that "adele is simply too magical to compare her to anyone." her second album, 21, shares the folk and soul influences of her debut album, but was further inspired by the american country and southern blues music to which she had been exposed during her 2008–09 north american tour an evening with adele. composed in the aftermath of the singer's separation from her partner, the album typifies the near dormant tradition of the confessional singer-songwriter in its exploration of heartbreak, self-examination, and forgiveness. having referred to 21 as a "break-up record", adele labelled her third studio album, 25, a "make-up record", adding it was about "making up for lost time. making up for everything i ever did and never did." her yearning for her old self, her nostalgia, and melancholy about the passage of time, is a feature of 25, with adele stating, "i've had a lot of regrets since i turned 25. and sadness hits me in different ways than it used to. there's a lot of things i don't think i'll ever get 'round to doing."
adele possesses a contralto vocal range. rolling stone reported that following throat surgery her voice had become "palpably bigger and purer-toned", and that she had added a further four notes to the top of her range. initially, critics suggested that her vocals were more developed and intriguing than her songwriting, a sentiment with which adele agreed. she has stated: "i taught myself how to sing by listening to ella fitzgerald for acrobatics and scales, etta james for passion and roberta flack for control." her voice has received acclaim from critics. in a review of 19, the observer said, "the way she stretched the vowels, her wonderful soulful phrasing, the sheer unadulterated pleasure of her voice, stood out all the more; little doubt that she's a rare singer". bbc music wrote, "her melodies exude warmth, her singing is occasionally stunning and, ...she has tracks that make lily allen and kate nash sound every bit as ordinary as they are." for their reviews of 21, the new york times' chief music critic jon pareles commended the singer's emotive timbre, comparing her to dusty springfield, petula clark, and annie lennox: "[adele] can seethe, sob, rasp, swoop, lilt and belt, in ways that draw more attention to the song than to the singer". ryan reed of paste magazine regarded her voice as "a raspy, aged-beyond-its-years thing of full-blooded beauty", while msn music's tom townshend declared her "the finest singer of [our] generation".


== personal life and other ventures ==
it was reported in january 2012 that adele was dating charity entrepreneur and old etonian simon konecki since the summer of 2011, when she met him. in june 2012, adele announced that she and konecki were expecting a baby. their son angelo was born on 19 october 2012. on the topic of becoming a parent, adele has since observed that she "felt like [she] was truly living. i had a purpose, where before i didn't". adele and konecki brought a privacy case against a uk-based photo agency that published paparazzi images of their son taken during family outings in 2013. lawyers working on their behalf accepted damages from the company in july 2014.
adele was criticized by celebrities such as karl lagerfeld and joan rivers for her weight, but has gained the support of many others, by stating that she is happy with her weight and would only change if it affected her health or sex life. in a 2009 interview, adele stated: "i like looking nice, but i always put comfort over fashion. i don’t find thin girls attractive; be happy and healthy. i’ve never had a problem with the way i look. i’d rather have lunch with my friends than go to a gym."
born in tottenham, north london, and raised in west norwood, south london, adele has a working class london accent, that rolling stone magazine says has only leavened slightly over the years. politically she is a supporter of the labour party, stating in 2011 that she was a "labour girl through and through." in may 2011, she advocated a lower tax rate for high-income earners; a view counter to that of the labour party. in 2015, adele stated "i'm a feminist, i believe that everyone should be treated the same, including race and sexuality".


== charity ==
adele has performed in numerous charity concerts throughout her career. in 2007 and 2008 she performed at the little noise sessions held at london's union chapel, with proceeds from the concerts donated to mencap which works with people with learning disabilities. in july and november 2008, adele performed at the keep a child alive black ball in london and new york city respectively. on 17 september 2009 she performed at the brooklyn academy of music, for the vh1 divas event, a concert to raise money for the save the music foundation charity. on 6 december, adele opened with a 40-minute set at john mayer's 2nd annual holiday charity revue held at the nokia theatre in los angeles. in 2011, adele gave a free concert for pride london, a registered charity which arranges lgbt events in london.
adele has been a major contributor to musicares, a charity organisation founded by the grammys for musicians in need. in february 2009, adele performed at the 2009 musicares charity concert in los angeles. in 2011 and 2012, adele donated autographed items for auctions to support musicares. when on tour, adele requires all backstage visitors to donate a minimum charitable contribution of $20 for the uk charity sands, an organisation dedicated to "supporting anyone affected by the death of a baby and promoting research to reduce the loss of babies' lives". during the uk and european leg of her adele live tour, she collected $13,000 for the charity.


== awards and achievements ==

at the 51st annual grammy awards in 2009, adele won awards in the categories of best new artist and best female pop vocal performance. she was also nominated in the categories of record of the year and song of the year. that same year, adele was also nominated for three brit awards in the categories of best british female, best british single and best british breakthrough act. then british prime minister gordon brown sent a thank-you letter to adele that stated "with the troubles that the country's in financially, you're a light at the end of the tunnel."
with 21 non-consecutive weeks at number 1 in the us, adele broke the record for the longest number-1 album by a woman in billboard history, beating the record formerly held by whitney houston's soundtrack the bodyguard. 21 spent its 23rd week at number one in march 2012, making it the longest-running album at number one since 1985, and it became the fourth best-selling album of the past 10 years in the united states.
in february 2012, adele was listed at number five on vh1′s 100 greatest women in music. in april 2012, american magazine time named adele one of the 100 most influential people in the world. people named her one of 2012 most beautiful at every age. on 30 april 2012, a tribute to adele was held at new york city's (le) poisson rouge called broadway sings adele, starring various broadway actors such as matt doyle. in july 2012, adele was listed at number six in forbes list of the world's highest-paid celebrities under the age of 30, having earned £23 million ($35 million) between may 2011 and may 2012.
on the week ending 3 march 2012, adele became the first solo female artist to have three singles in the top 10 of the billboard hot 100 at the same time, and the first female artist to have two albums in the top 5 of the billboard 200 and two singles in the top 5 of the billboard hot 100 simultaneously. adele topped the 2012 sunday times rich list of musicians in the uk under 30 and made the top 10 of billboard magazine's "top 40 money makers". billboard also announced the same day that adele's "rolling in the deep" is the biggest crossover hit of the past 25 years, topping pop, adult pop and adult contemporary charts and that adele is one of four female artists to have an album chart at number one for more than 13 weeks (the other three artists being judy garland, carole king, and whitney houston). on 6 march, 21 reached 30 non-consecutive weeks at number one on the australian aria chart, making it the longest-running number one album in australia in the 21st century, and the second longest-running number one ever.
at the 2012 ivor novello awards in may, adele was named songwriter of the year, and "rolling in the deep" won the award for most performed work of 2011. at the 2012 bmi awards held in london in october, adele won song of the year (for "rolling in the deep") in recognition of the song being the most played on us television and radio in 2011.
in 2013, adele won the academy award for best original song for the james bond theme "skyfall". this is the first james bond song to win and only the fifth to be nominated (after "for your eyes only" (1981), "nobody does it better" (1977) (from the spy who loved me), "live and let die" (1973), and "the look of love" (1967) (from the original casino royale)). "skyfall" won the brit award for best british single at the 2013 brit awards.
in june 2013, adele was appointed a member of the most excellent order of the british empire (mbe) in the queen's birthday honours list for services to music, and she received the award from prince charles at buckingham palace on 19 december 2013. in february 2013, she was assessed as one of the 100 most powerful women in the united kingdom by woman's hour on bbc radio 4.


== discography ==

19 (2008)
21 (2011)
25 (2015)


== concert tours ==
headlining tours
an evening with adele (2008–09)
adele live (2011)
adele live 2016 (2016)


== see also ==
list of one-word stage names
honorific nicknames in popular music
list of billboard social 50 number-one artists
billboard music award
list of artists who reached number one in the united states


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
adele at dmoz
adele at the internet movie database
adele collected news and commentary at the guardian
adele at mtv